---
layout: article-aligned
title: "The Coronal Cooling Conference: rain, prominences and eruptions"
categories: articles
excerpt: "Registration is open!"
modified: 2023-12-14
share: true
image:
  teaser: CoCoCon2024.png
---

Announcement: The Coronal Cooling Conference 2024

Dates: May 21-24th 2024

Location: KU Leuven, Belgium

[Website](https://wis.kuleuven.be/events/coco-con/home)

The Coronal Cooling Conference 2024 will bring together researchers in the field of coronal condensation to discuss the latest advances and plans for the decade ahead. The primary focus of this conference will be on the formation and development of cool plasma within the solar corona, with particular attention paid to coronal rain, solar prominences, and associated eruptive phenomena.

Following the great success of the ERC advanced grant PROMINENT project, we invite you to the hosting institution in the beautiful city of Leuven: the Centre for mathematical Plasma Astrophysics, to be a part of what is shaping up to be a fantastic exchange of knowledge.

We already have an outstanding roster of invited speakers, and are committed to making this conference a welcoming and friendly space. We especially welcome attendance and submissions from early career researchers as well as researchers from under-represented groups.

Important dates:

The final registration deadline is 21st April 2024.
Registrations are subsidised and, therefore, cost only €50. This includes attendance fees, conference meal, refreshments, and social/cultural activities. However, the number of places available is limited, therefore we recommend booking early to guarantee your attendance – Visit our website to book your place!

Abstract submission deadline: 21st March 2024.

Solar Physics Topical Issue

CoCo-Con also has a topical issue of the Solar Physics Journal associated with it. Submissions are particularly encouraged from speakers and attendees, but relevant submissions from non-attendees are also warmly welcomed. Articles should be original, unpublished, scientific journal articles and will be fully peer reviewed. You should indicate in your abstract whether you intend to submit a related article to the topical issue of the Solar Physics journal. See the website for more details.

We look forward to seeing you there!

Valeriia Liakh
KU Leuven, Belgium
On behalf of the SOC and LOC


